Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Doctor
Kostas Kampouakis. He's author and editor of several books
about science. He works at the Teacher Training Institute
and the section. Biology at the University of Geneva
and today we're talking about his book Darwin Mythology
Debunking Myths, Correcting Falsehoods. So Dr. Kampoakis, welcome back
to the show. It's always a pleasure to talk
with you.
Thank you very much. It's a pleasure for me
too.
OK, so let me start by asking you, I
guess, a simple question. So what is the premise
of the book and why did you feel the
need to write a book, uh, such a volume
on Darwin and myths surrounding Darwin?
Yeah. Well, Darwin is perhaps the most well-known uh
naturalist of all time, and even though there are
so many books about him, there also exists numerous
myths. And whereas I had seen them being debunked
in one book or another, I thought that it
would be useful to have a collection. Uh, WITH
all the myths debunked in one place. And as
you know, this is not a book I wrote
because I don't think that any single person could
have written this book because uh the scholarship and
the available material on Darwin is enormous. That's why
I'm glad that I managed to bring together a
group of stellar historians, each one of whom, uh,
took the task to debunk uh a specific myth,
and here we are with this collection.
So, I mean, of course, Darwin is considered a
very big figure, I mean, the biggest figure in
biology, and evolutionary biology and so on in naturalism
more generally. And he's considered, of course, a hero
by many people. So what would you say are
the problems with hero worshiping in science and other
disciplines?
Yeah, I think this is a big issue and
this is actually the topic of another book I
have written about Mendel, uh, because Mendel, Darwin, and
other people uh are important, uh, in what they
did, but they were never alone. All of them
always relied on predecessors or contemporaries, people who did
similar work. And of course, there's something to be
uh important about them. There's, there are features that
distinguish them from others, but it was never the
case that they did what they did on their
own. They always received feedback, material, information. Uh, VIEWS
from other people. And they relied on the predecessors,
they worked with contemporaries, and therefore, hero worshiping masks
the important fact that science is always done by
communities. Even though we may have some brilliant individuals
who managed to bring together the key ideas, it
was never them alone who came up with these
ideas.
Mhm. And in regards to hero worshiping and this
sort of simplistic narratives that many times we hear
about the lives of scientists and other intellectuals, why
do you think that people tend to like them
so much?
Well, we like them because it is easy to
think that a single genius individual uh who is
Far away from what we, you know, normal people
are, came up with this brilliant idea. I think
we like heroes. That's why mythology was something that
people always like. That's why people watch films with
heroes. And it's, and it's also a very simple
explanation that, you know, that someone brilliant found this
and we're done. Uh, HOWEVER, this, I repeat, this
is not how science, uh, is done, and this
is actually something that makes science seem distant to
people, whereas all those individuals, they were brilliant, but
they were also ordinary people with ordinary lives. So
there's no need to make this uh seem very,
very different from what regular people are. Uh, PEOPLE
like heroes, uh, for many reasons. There is also
the fact that textbooks and school materials perpetuate these
images, you know, with, uh, this historical vignettes they
usually have about the lives of, um, these people.
And I must not, I, I don't want to
mean that these people were not important. They were
important, but they always worked in a specific context,
scientific and social, which we have to acknowledge.
Mhm. So, let's talk a little bit about myths
before we explore some of the myths in regarding
Darwin that you talk about in the book because
you also talk about myths themselves in the book.
So, first of all, what is the myth and
what roles do myths play?
Myths are not just simple falsehoods, and that's why
in the subtitle of the book, I make the
distinction between debunking myths and correcting falsehoods. Falsehoods are
inaccurate statements about history, which are probably easy to
correct, but myths are more than that. And as
the late John Halborn uh explains in this magnificent
first chapter that he kindly accepted to write. Uh,
MYTHS usually serve a role, a specific role in
the specific social context in which they're conceived. And
that's why they're not always bad. And there are
myths that sometimes are useful. Of course, there are
myths that are sometimes dangerous, but they are there
in some sense in a deliberate way. They're not
just accidents uh of history or falsehoods that nobody
cared to correct. This exists, but myths are more
than that.
Mhm. And uh in the book you talk about
an interesting distinction that Costas Gavroglu, I hope I'm
pronouncing the name correctly, has made among three different
kinds of myths andnodyne myths, dangerous myths, and historiographical
myths. Could you tell us about
that? Yeah, historian Koso Ravroullo made this distinction which
I found very useful and as you see, I
cite a book in Greek that he wrote. And
the key issue here is that we have myths
that, you know, do not do any harm. For
instance, whether Galileo dropped those balls from Pisa or
the Pisa Tower or not, it doesn't change anything
in how science is done. This is what he
describes as anodyne myths, myths that do no harm.
This is what the word means. But there are
also dangerous myths like the perpetual myths that. You
know, science and religion are always in conflict which
masks the complicated interaction between scientists and their religious
beliefs, scientists themselves and the church across time. This
is a very strange, uh, complicated, interesting uh relationship
that is not clearly explained by the representation of
the conflict. And we also have in the end,
as he argues, historiographical myths which were created by
historians in the past in their attempt to correct
the first two kinds. Uh, FOR instance, you know,
that the science is objective and is not affected
by the cultural context, which of course is not
true. All of us. All scientists, everyone who works
in a specific sociocultural context, and they're always influences.
So there are myths which are more or less
important. There are myths that do more or less
harm, uh, but all these are more just, just
falsehoods, and it is important to keep this in
mind.
Mhm. So, of course, we will not have time
to go through all of the myths regarding Darwin
that you explore in the book. So I just
picked some of them that I think are good
illustrations of what you explore there both in regards
to Darwin's work and character, but also a broader
comment. Carry on how science works and is done
and how we should relate to, uh, scientists. So,
first of all, were Darwin's ideas original to him?
I mean, for instance, did people before Darwin really
not think that species change was possible?
Yeah, Pietro Corsi explains in his chapter that the
idea of evolution was in the air long before
Darwin. It is now, it's also interesting that all
the key uh notions that Darwin used, uh, the
analogy with artificial selection, uh, the idea that Malthus
had about the struggle for existence, and everything else
were there. What was brilliant in Darwin is that
he found a way to put these pieces of
the puzzle together and pro. A theory, the basis
of which is still accepted today. And the key
idea that Darwin is dissent with modification with two
important aspects, common descent on the one hand, and
natural selection on the other, which leads to divergence.
Uh, SO what the brilliance of Darwin was through
his deep, uh, reading and his own experimental work
and observations to bring everything together in a quite
coherent theory.
More, uh, but more broadly, what does it mean
for ideas to be original? I mean, does it
matter who have the ideas first and what does
it mean exactly?
Mhm. Well, there are some people who come up
with original ideas, but when it comes to science,
I don't think that it is the idea that
is uh the only important aspect. It is also
who manages to do something with this idea, for
instance, propose a theory that explains or makes predictions.
And this is the important stuff. So, We do
not really know who was the first to come
up with the idea of evolution, but it was
Darwin, who in 1859, published a book that presented
a coherent theory. There were theories before that, for
instance, uh, Lamarck had proposed the theory many years
before Darwin, but this was a quite speculative theory.
It was not a theory as well constructed and
as well documented as Darwin's. This being said, what
Darwin managed to show was the potential of his
theory to explain evolution, but he never managed to
show that natural selection was actually competent in producing
new species, something that of course since then has
been demonstrated in several different ways.
Mhm. So, of course, we know that, uh, we,
we know it's true that some other person could
have come up with the theory of evolution by
natural selection instead of Darwin because we have someone
like Alfred Russell Wallace. But do you think that
even other people in that particular historic and cultural
context could have come up with the idea if
Darwin never existed?
Mhm. Absolutely. First of all, Darwin has been blamed
by at least 3 authors that he stole the
idea from some other people, one of them being
Wallace. And Wallace did not come up with the
same theory as Michael Roos explained in his chapter.
Uh, IT was a similar, a similar idea but
with different basis. Uh, BUT historians have argued that
it is not a coincidence that it was Wallace
who lived in the same, uh, imperial, uh, social,
cultural context of England at the time who came
up uh with the, this idea because it was
the aspects of society. Uh, THAT made him think
in a similar way with Darwin. Nevertheless, Darwin had
worked on that, uh, theory for a longer time,
and as historians admit, he managed to establish it
in a perhaps more coherent way than Wallace, who
nevertheless thought in quite similar terms. Mhm.
And who were the people who influenced Darwin the
most because I think it's also important for people
to understand who's behind the ideas that then led
Darwin to come up with his own ideas. So,
uh, tell us about that? Yeah, I, I think
there are 3 principle, 3 major influences. The first
one was his uh observation and work related to
animal breeding. So he got engaged in breeder societies.
He was able to see how uh breeders could
do artificial selection in order to make individual animals
that they wanted and produce the features uh in
the next generation that they wished. Uh, SO that
was one important uh aspect. And the, the big
problem that Darwin had to deal with was, OK,
but who's making this selection? In artificial selection with
breeding in the context of breeding, it was humans
who made that selection, but what happens in nature?
And then when he read the uh the book
by Thomas Malthus that talked about uh the struggle
of existence, that an idea that was very common
at the time in the social context in which
they will lived, he thought that perhaps it was
a struggle and the competition within and between species
that was driving this selection. This was already a
core element of the theory uh which Darwin had
very well developed until 1839, but there was something
missing. Uh, WHAT was missing was how the divergence
of species was possible, and it took him another
almost 20 years until 1857 to come up with
another principle which is important for his theory, the
principle of divergence. Uh, THAT showed that wherever there
was space in the ecosystems, there was an open
niche, it could be occupied by uh individuals which
would thus, uh, further diverge in adapting in their
environments. And he started writing a big book that
he would call natural selection, but it was the
receipt of the letter by Wallace in 1858 that
made him. Uh, RECONSIDER things and write an abstract
of 500 pages of, uh, which was the origin
of species. Uh, SO it was all in all
his readings and understanding of, uh, development, uh, with
respect. To the principle of divergence, Mattos's idea of
the struggle for existence, and importantly, and that was
a key difference with Wallace, uh, the analogy uh
with artificial selection that produced the core of his
theory.
So we have to, of course, talk about his
historic visit to the Galapagos Islands because everyone talks
about that. I mean, it's one of the most
famous uh aspects, events, if you want to call
it that of Darwin's life and Uh, I mean,
there's this common idea that, uh, what he was
exposed to there was enough to convert him to
evolutionary theory. I mean, is that true? And what
did he gain intellectually from this visit? Mhm.
No, it's not true, and that's an interesting myth
because uh the visit to the Galapagos is usually
described, presented as a eureka moment. Darwin suddenly saw
the finches and came up with this brilliant idea,
but the truth is that Darwin had no clue
what was happening. When he visited there, it was
only later upon his return to England that ornithologist
John Gould managed to understand the connections between the
different specimens that Darwin had brought with him or
sent back to England during his trips and Even
after that, it doesn't seem that uh the finches
were that important because even though they have a
prominent place in his book about the uh the
Beagle voyage. They're not even mentioned in The Origin
of Species. So they're not that important for the
theory and it seems it was other organisms in
the Galapagos which were more important. So, this is
not um perhaps something a myth that is that
dangerous but it is misleading because we tend to
present an individual with a sudden observation and a
sudden, uh, you know, insight that goes up to
bring uh a theory, but of course, the real
story is more complicated than that.
So you mentioned the finches, uh, what about them?
I mean, what insights did you really get from
them?
When once uh Darwin understood the connection, he realized
that uh They were different but related species that
had evolved from perhaps a single individual, which was
something that was new at the time. Uh, THERE
were many people who believed in special creation. Darwin,
of course, was wondering why he could not see
the same species. Inhabiting similar environments which would make
sense from the perspective of special creation. If a
divine uh entity of God had created species, it
would be something to expect that they would be
created in order to fit, to be adopted in
the specific uh conditions. But, uh, he realized that
in different volcanic islands, Uh, Galapagos and that's where
there were different species living. And it only made
sense to explain this by thinking that, well, it's
not a special creation, it has to do with
individuals migrating from nearby continents. That diversified and diverged
to produce the species that were there. So when
he realized what the available evidence was, it, it
made sense to uh explain this as uh the
outcome of a migration from uh the American continent
and what we call today adaptive radiation of the
different uh species in the, on the different islands.
So there's this also uh this myth that Darwin
was a sort of armchair theoretician that, I mean,
he came up with these ideas, these theories, basically
by uh sitting for very long periods of time
thinking very hardly about whatever he was thinking about
to come up with these ideas. So, I mean,
is that really the case?
Well, it's uh an interesting story because, you know,
he traveled around the world for 5 years and
then moved to London, got married, and once they
moved uh uh south of London to Downhouse, he
practically never left the place instead for some, you
know, some therapies or short trips. He was not
working to earn his living. Uh, HE did not
give public lectures. He did not appear that much
in the scientific meetings of, uh, of the time.
So that of shows that he was a bit
distant from uh the social activities of science, but
he had an enormous number of correspondents all over
the world, and he also did experimental work himself
and observations uh in, in his house. So he
was not an armchair theoretician, he was a practical
experimentalist. Uh HE was a scientist who was doing
real scientific work. It is just that he was
a bit Um, disconnected physically, uh, he did not
appear in person meetings, but as I said, he
had a huge number of correspondents with whom he
exchanged views, who sent him samples or anything he
wanted. So he was quite active in real scientific
work. Nothing to do with just uh thinking and
developing theories uh without any practical part.
And he also bred pigeons, right? So that's another
example uh that illustrates why and how he wasn't
just simply a theoretician.
Yeah, he, he, he did interesting work, you know,
he was trying to see, for instance, whether the
seeds of plants can survive in salted water in
order to, to explain whether seeds could be transferred
through sea from, you know, the continent uh to
islands. He did all kind of different kinds of
experimental work which was very interesting.
And I mean, even for scientists in general, is
the, is being uh an armchair thinker really the
way by which scientists usually come up with ideas
because there's this very common idea that, I mean,
there are certain. Individuals who have very high cognitive
capacity that if they just sit on some ideas
for long enough, then they can come up with
big uh uh big revolutionary theories. But is that
really how science tends to work?
Uh NOT at all, even though I should say
that today with all these data available on our
computers, I, I know scientists who can, you know,
compile DNA data from different databases and do computational
analysis, but even that is not really armchair thinking.
It is work, real scientific work, but it's not
done always in the lab, it's done on the
computer. And nevertheless, even if today we have uh
different means of interaction, mostly the internet that was
not available in Taiwan's time, and we cannot really
describe scientists as armchair thinkers because they need to
have data and they need to explain what they
see uh in ways that are uh in agreement
with this data.
Mhm. So let's talk a little bit about Lamarck.
I mean, how did Darwin react to Lamarck's ideas,
at least on the first, uh, uh, instance? I
mean, did he really reject them outright?
Well, Darwin, it seems that he did not like
the spec the very speculative um aspect of Lamarck's
theory. Uh, HE was exposed to it when he
was uh very young in Edinburgh. Uh, WORKING with
Gran there and uh he was also aware of
the the, the speculations of his own grandfather Erasmus
Darwin. Now, in his writing, he has on several
occasions tried to distance himself from Lamarck's nonsense, he
wrote one. But if you look at his theory,
in some sense he's more Lamarckian than Lamarck himself
in the sense of how important uh the idea
of using. This use was for the production of
variation in his own theory. So, whereas publicly, he
has distanced himself from Lamarck, he practically accepted not
the exact mechanism that Lamarck proposed, but a very
similar idea where using this use was important for
the production of variation.
Um, IN regards to his, uh, theories, we can
we reduce Darwin's theories to natural selection and was
his main theory completed after he arrived that, that
idea?
Uh, NO, and that's uh another important myth that,
you know, Darwin came up with a theory, as
I said in uh March 1839. He had natural
selection, that is all. No, natural selection, of course,
is an important aspect of his theory, but there
are other important ones. The most important two being
uh the idea of common descent. Which was not
widely accepted uh uh at the time, and the
principle of divergence, which was key uh for how
natural selection works. So natural selection is indeed one
important uh part of his theory, but it's not
that his whole theory can be reduced to that.
Right. So you've already mentioned this briefly in, in
uh earlier in our conversation, but were Darwin's and
Alfred Russell Wallace's theories the same?
No, they were not the same. That there was
essentially a process like natural selection described in both,
but there were important differences throughout the years. The
most important one being the analogy with artificial selection.
For Darwin, this was key. For Wallace, it was
wrong and that's why uh at some point he
suggested Darwin to replace the concept of natural selection.
With the concept of the survival of the fittest,
which had been coined by Herbert Spencer. For Wallace,
the idea that there's selection done by someone or
somehow was misleading in how natural selection, in how
the process takes place. And so the analogy with
artificial selection was a big, big difference between the
two views. It was central for Darwin. It was
practically wrong for Wallace.
So there is also this very common idea that
uh once Darwin came up with this theory of
evolution by natural selection and published on the Origin
of Species and then these other books, but particularly
The Origin of Species. He basically won the argument.
When when the debate immediately, but were there opponents
of Darwin's that had good scientific arguments?
Absolutely. It is interesting that there are two reviews
appearing a few months after the publication of The
Origin of Species, both anonymous, which have the same,
the very same argument that natural selection has never
been, had never been shown at the time. To
be actually competent to produce new species. And this
argument was made both in the review by Samuel
Wilberforce, Bishop of Oxford, and by Thomas Henry Huxley,
who was one of Darwin's most ardent supporters. Both
of them acknowledged and made the scientific argument saying
that look, natural selection as proposed by Darwin might
in principle, explain. The uh emergence of new species,
but what, what is an actual example? There was
no actual example of the diamond. And Darwin never
managed to provide one.
Mhm. So, uh, people attribute very commonly the phrase
survival of the fittest to Darwin, but where does
it really come from?
Yeah, as I said, that was an idea, a
concept coined by Herbert Spencer, and that was what
Darwin was gradually convinced to uh replace that uh
in subsequent. Um, TO use that to replace natural
selection in subsequent editions of the origin. And the
reason was that, and it is true, natural selection
is a bad metaphor because there's this implicit idea
that someone does the selection. But interestingly, survival of
the fittest is even worse because it is an
eliminative view of selection, whereas natural selection allows for
variations to coexist and this gives material to evolution.
And the, the idea of survival of the fittest
is not a creative selection, it's a eliminated selection
that takes out all but one, and this actually
limits the potential for further evolution. So both metaphors
have problems, and neither natural selection, neither survival of
the fittest was ideal, but natural selection eventually was
closer to Darwin's own views.
Mhm. So did Darwin undermine essentialism because we also
hear very commonly that once he came up and
published about his theory of evolution by natural selection
then. uh, I mean, sometimes people talk about biological
essentialism, other times just specifically about species essentially that,
that was completely undermined by his uh theory. I
mean, but, but did he really undermine essentialism and
if so, what kind of essentialism exactly?
Yeah. It was a kind of typological essentialism that
Darwin had to deal with. It was certainly not
Aristotelian essentially that was the problem. And the, the
big issue here, notwithstanding the details, it was that
the, the myth, and this is perhaps a bit
implicit in the chapter. And the, what annoys me
in this story is that we have a big
figure of science, Aristotle. And another big figure, Darwin,
and the second shows that the first was wrong.
Of course, the story is never as simple as
that and it's never about individual figures, no matter
how important their contributions were. Uh, THERE is this
intuitive notion that, you know, in scientific revolution, we
had 2000 years of uh Aristotelian biology and then
Darwin suddenly came and destroyed everything and changed everything.
It was neither one nor the other. It was
always a complicated story. What is true is that
people tended not to realize the extent of variation
that is available in nature, not even Darwin himself
before he did his famous study with the barnacles.
And so what Darwin brought in, which was new
and important was That he documented that there was
a lot of variation available in nature and therefore
it was possible for selection to take place, and
he also noted that, you know, the, the limits
between species are not always that clear. It's not,
even today, we know that it's not simple to
delimit uh species. So we have this intuitive notion
of essentialism that we still use to do taxonomy
and classification because we have to define some essential
properties, but still, it is not as clear cut
as we think it to be. At the time,
essentially it was more accepted because under the notion
of special creation, we could think that species are
created and therefore are clearly the limited. That one
realized that they were not clearly the limited and
this brought in the idea that perhaps they're not
created but have evolved from one another.
So let me ask you now about his 1871
prediction of African human origins about how humans originated
in Africa. What did he claim
exactly? Well, that that was not really a scientific
prediction. It was just a speculation that because humans
and uh apes are quite similar. And because apes
are mostly found in Africa, therefore, it makes sense
to think that uh humans may have originated in
Africa, which in the end was shown to be
the case, but it was not uh really uh
a, a consistent and coherent scientific prediction. It was
just a speculation that ended up being correct because
of the similarities that were evident. What was important
is that that we accepted that, you know, apes
uh could be our relatives, which was not something
that other people find, found easy to accept.
Mhm. So let's talk a little bit now about
the scientific revolution. So was Darwin's theory revolutionary, at
least in the life sciences?
Well, it was not exactly revolutionary in the Kunian
sense that, you know, there was a paradigm uh
that was very different than Darwin brought something that
was entirely new. Uh, BUT what Darwin managed to
establish was first the idea of common dissent, which
he documented very well in his book, and second,
the process by which diver divergence diversification is possible.
So what was revolutionary in Darwin. WAS that he
managed to bring together many different elements that produced
a quite coherent theory. And as I said, even
today, after so many years, the main premise, dissent
with modification is something that we still accept. Of
course, the details have changed, the theory has advanced,
but What was revolutionary in some sense in Darwin
is that he managed to establish a coherent theory
which we use uh still today.
And uh at least in the Kunian sense, what
makes for a scientific revolution? I mean, what is
a scientific revolution exactly?
In the Kunin sense, we have, you have to
have two paradigms that are very different, uh, that,
uh, a commensurable is a term that could use
that and totally different from each other and The
new one has to entirely replace the previous one.
But if you look at the, the theories accepted
before and after, first of all, there's no, uh,
there were many different, different theories before Darwin and
there were many different theories after Darwin. Darwinism, as
we call it today itself, was not accepted immediately.
It took years for it to be widely accepted.
It was well in the 2 the 20th century
that it became the mainstream theory. So it was
never the case that we had the complete replacement
of one theory by another. We had many theories
before, many theories after. It was just that Darwin's
was the most solid one, and that's why again
we accept today it's main premises. Not all the
details because many of the details were wrong, obviously.
Mhm. So, just a minute ago, you mentioned that
uh the theory of evolution by natural selection over
time has changed, of course, and there's been the
introduction of new ideas and new data provided us
with a better understanding of how evolution actually works
and even more recently, we have proposals like the
extended evolutionary synthesis and things like that. So, uh,
I mean, I wanted to ask you, I, I'm,
I don't think that you talk exactly about this
in the book, but it's sort of related to
the ideas you explore there. I mean, many times
when we talk about Darwin, people sort of put
him on a pedestal and uh if someone questions
some of his ideas. AND provides novel data and
information and says that Darwin was wrong in this
or that aspect. Sometimes people have a very negative
and even emotional reaction to that as if Darwin,
just because he, he, he came up with the
theory originally, I guess we can say, um, that,
that it We can't really question him, uh, that,
that Darwin is basically someone we can't question when
it comes to natural selection and evolutionary biology more
generally. But that's not really how we should treat
the scientists and their ideas.
Exactly. Well, for some people, Darwinism is a kind
of secular religion. Uh, AND they do not accept
any criticism on Darwin, but Darwin was wrong on
many things, as all scientists have been wrong on
many things. Actually, most scientists have been wrong on
most of the things that they have said, but
it is just that some of them ended up
being correct, accurate, and work, uh, but it is
normal in science not to be able to find
all the answers immediately. In some cases, never. And
then, of course, it is always a collaborative endeavor.
There are groups that work across time and this
is why, as you said, evolutionary theory itself has
evolved. We had the merging with genetics at the
beginning of the 20th century. We have, uh, the
merging with development and genomics and all this recent
stuff and epigenetics more recently, the theory becomes richer.
And with a greater potential to explain, uh, and
this is how science works. Uh THEORIES evolve. Darwin,
I repeat once again, put a solid basis, dissent
with modification, that's what we still accept. But he
was wrong about many things, and that's normal. Uh,
HE could not have known what we know today,
but he put us, the scientists doing research in
the path that was very fruitful, and this is
why we still accept the theory. Mhm.
So, uh let's, uh, let me just ask you
about one last topic then, and it, it is
just a sort of conclusion to all of what
we've been talking about. So, uh tell us about
the main things we can learn about science as
a human activity by tackling myths like this.
Mhm. Well, hero worshiping is a big problem as
we have already discussed. And it is important to
know that uh science is not done by male
white individuals who are more brilliant than other people.
It is done by humans who work in groups
and who collectively together produce what we accept as
knowledge. And this is why it is the consensus
of experts that matters. It is not what Darwin,
Mendello, any individual ever said. Uh, WHAT we call
today's scientific knowledge is what was accepted as the
consensus by experts. Now, as I got to the
conclusion, at the, at Darwin's time, the position of
women, not only in science is society, society more
broadly. It was much worse than it is today.
I hope that uh uh today we're, you know,
doing better in that sense. People should be judged
not by the gender. There or anything else that
should be just about, you know, the intellectual contributions
when it comes to science. uh BUT as I
show, uh Darwin, even though he did not think
that women were as capable, capable intellectually as men,
he did help many of them, uh, when he
realized that there was something in what they had
to, to, to contribute. And I think this is
very important. No matter his um prejudices and There
were many prejudice at the time. He did help
some women to advance and produce uh the kind
of work they wanted to do. So all in
all, we need to think of science as a
collective endeavor done by uh many people. Uh, AND
what is important is to realize that it is
the view of experts, the consensus of the expert
communities that is important, not what any single individual,
no matter how influential he, she is, has to
say.
Mhm. And we also have to take into account,
I guess, the influence of the historical, social, cultural,
and even scientific milieu of the particular individuals. I
mean, where they lived in the the sort of
broad. CONTEXT they inhabited.
Absolutely. I mean, Darwin was working in the tradition
of natural theology for which adaptation was crucial and
this is why, you know, by reading Paley, he
became interested in the question of adaptation and then
he had uh the political economies of the time.
Adam Smith and Thomas Matthews, they were both important
influences on him. And then he traveled all over
the world thanks to the British ships, and he
sent back his material. So all in all, he
worked in a context that facilitated what he was
doing. It would not have been perhaps that easy
for anyone else, anywhere else in the world, and
that's why, as I said, it's not a coincidence,
perhaps the Wallace, who worked and lived in the
same context, came up with the same idea.
Mhm. And I guess that it's not just the
ways that the context can facilitate the production of
particular ideas or coming up with particular ideas, but
also how we can limit the individual when it
comes to uh his, his or her biases and
limitations when it comes. To producing science because, for
example, certain kind of scientific information or data might
not be there yet and they also might be
influenced by their social milieu as Darwin was when
it comes to his ideas about women, for example.
Right. Mhm. Yeah, and that's why the community matters
because it is the community that will serve as
a filter. To filter out what each individual says,
and the community together will decide which a view
makes more sense or not. Uh, THAT'S why individuals
have their own biases, but you know, when the
community comes together, these biases can be discussed, filtered,
and we end up with the most plausible theory
possible.
Mhm. Great. So, the book is again Darwin Mythology,
Debunking myths, Correcting Falsehoods. Of course, I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview
and I'm also leaving a link to our first
interview. So Doctor Campoakis, just before we go, apart
from the book, where can people find your work
on the internet?
Well, uh, I have a personal, uh, website, the
Caraciss.com, where all my work, uh, is available, both
books and articles, and much of it is accessible.
Of course, anybody is welcome to contact me and
ask for any material possible.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's, as
I said at the beginning, it's always a pleasure
to talk with you.
It's a pleasure for me too. Thank you for
the invitation.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.